Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're
going to introduce a two-dimensional aspect
to algebra we're going to do that by talking
about polynomials with two variables instead
of one variable or as we prefer to frame things
introducing poly numbers with a two-dimensional
aspect we don't do that in two stages the first
stage is to consider a variant of the poly numbers
that we've been so far considering where we write
the polynomial and poly numbers and roll poly
numbers that'll give us a two-dimensional aspect
to algebra so to set the stage let's just have a
quick review of basic arithmetic with poly numbers
that we've been so far considering we're going to
talk about integral poly numbers mostly where the
coefficients are integers we might also call these
things poly integers and there I remind you is
the type of the object that we're considering so
there's a integral politie number it's called P
and here's another one whose name is Q and they
are just columns of integers columns of integers
we can write them alternately sort of in this
linear form by introducing this special poly
number alpha which is the poly number 0 what
plays a distinguished role in the theory so
then this one here can be written as 3 minus
alpha plus 2 alpha cubed while this one is 1 plus
4 alpha and here are the sum of these two polymers
and here's the product and those - written in
standard alpha form and over here the addition
and multiplication is just the usual one that you
learn in high school adding and multiply those two
polynomials together but the point is we can work
completely with just the column of coefficients
if we prefer we don't actually need the variable
alpha actually alpha is not really a variable it's
actually a special poly number so the advantage in
working this way is that it's computationally much
more explicit and clear what we're talking about
the ordinary treatment of polynomials that you
find in high school courses or college courses is
vague about what the actual role of the variable
is be it X or Y or T or alpha it's not too easy
usually to say what exactly a variable is it's
a a word that comes from the English language but
it's being used here in mathematics in a somewhat
novel way and different mathematicians have
different interpretations as to what exactly
a variable is you asked a dozen mathematician
what is the variable X you're probably going to
get a dozen different sounding answers with this
approach here it's more like computer science
we're just working with the essential aspect of
the polynomials namely the coefficients themselves
all right so we might call these things now call
up Pauli numbers this is a new terminology because
we're now shortly going to consider variants of
these where we don't write things down in terms
of columns but rather across in rows all right
so a row poly number now here are two examples
there's a new Pauline umber p3 2-1 and notice that
there's a square bracket to the left that's sort
of where the poly number starts and then there's
a round bracket at the back or at the end that's
something that we didn't have in the column
formulation but it's convenient to introduce it
here in the role formulation that's because when
we write things we usually write things along a
line if there's no closing bracket there it can
be easily confused as to where this poly number
stops and say the next object starts so when
we're riding along a row it's very convenient
to have a poly number with a fixed beginning
and a fixed end but notice this is a square
bracket and this is a round bracket alerting
us to the fact that this thing is a new kind
of mathematical object it's not a vector it's not
anything else it's a poly number a ro poly number
all right so how are we going to add and multiply
to such things well it's exactly the same as with
column poly numbers except everything is
along rows and you have to remember that
we're starting from the left here so this is the
zeroth coefficient this is the first coefficient
this is the second coefficient and so on so the
sum of these two polynomials is just coefficient
by coefficient 3 plus 4 is 7 2 Plus 0 is 2 minus 1
plus minus 1 is minus 2 now what about the product
that's the same as effectively what we're doing
with column poly numbers except we're obliged to
write it along a row so let's just check that
how do we multiply these two things well the
zeroth coefficient here is 3 times 4 the next
coefficient we get by taking the product of 3
times 0 as well as the product of 2 times 4 and
adding them together so we're taking all the the
pairs so that the the coefficient numbers will add
up to 1 0 and the first the first and the 0 to get
that minus 7 in the 0 1 2 in the second place we
take 3 times minus 1 plus 2 times 0 plus minus 1
times for a total of minus 7 this one here in the
0 1 2 third spot obtained by taking the zeroth
one here and the third one here there is no third
entry there so we consider it to be 0 so 3 times
0 plus 2 times minus 1 plus minus 1 times 0 plus
0 times 4 the only one that was not 0 there was
the 2 times minus 1 and the last entry we get by
that's the 0 1 2 3 4 so we have to look just see
here when we multiply these two things how can
we get something of coefficient 4 we get it by
multiplying this thing of coefficient 2 and this
thing of coefficient 2 minus 1 times minus 1 is 1
all right now we're to consider a row analog of
that important poly number alpha we're to call it
beta so beta is the corresponding row poly number
it's the poly number 0 1 then beta squared will
be 0 0 1 beta cubed will be 0 0 0 1 and so on and
so we can write any poly number now in row form as
a combination of powers of beta we'll call that
the standard beta form for a row poly number so
here's what the general formulation we have a row
poly number whose coefficients are B 0 B 1 and so
on up to say B sub K then we can write that in
standard beta form as B 0 times beta to the 0
plus B 1 times beta to the 1 plus B 2 times beta
squared and all the way up to be K times beta to
the K that's sort of our additional way of writing
it and more informally will drop the beta to the
0 just replace that with one and replace beta
to the 1 simply with beta so that's what a role
poly number is and could easily have started
our discussion of poly numbers by working with
raw poly numbers first so while the arithmetic of
column poly numbers and the arithmetic of row poly
numbers is essentially the same still it might
be more convenient for certain problems to work
in one form and more convenient for other problems
to work in another form in particular when you're
adding polynomials it's usually more convenient
to have them as columns when you're multiplying
though I think it's also more convenient to
have them as columns since those were our two
basic operations it's why I introduced column
poly numbers first however division arguably
is a little bit easier to connect with ordinary
division of numbers when we're using row poly
numbers so for example we saw that four zero minus
one times three two minus one happened to be this
poly number 12 8 minus seven minus two one so it
follows that if we take this part number and we
divide it by this one then we ought to get this
in standard beta form the same expression would
be written this way so this poly number here
would be written as this polynomial 12 plus 8
beta minus seven beta squared minus 2 beta cube
plus beta to the fourth and this one divided by
four minus beta squared and the right-hand side
would be 3 plus 2 beta minus beta squared you
can see that it's a little bit less economical
to write this because we're repeating a lot of
these betas although sometimes it might be more
economical to write things this way because then
we don't have to write lots of zeros if our
poly numbers had lots of zeros in there we
can just drop the corresponding beta terms like
we did right here ok so let's have a look at do
once again using low poly numbers now so as an
example of division let's compute that division
on the previous page so we're gonna divide this
polynomial and hopefully we'll get this one as the
quotient and I'm going to do it in two different
ways sort of an analytic approach and an algebraic
approach and hopefully we'll get the same answer
so let's start by concentrating on the leftmost
entries the ones with the smallest powers of beta
corresponding so we're dividing this by this but
I remind you what that reflectively means is we're
asking how many of these fit inside here the idea
is we're going to take multiples of this thing
and subtracted from here making the difference
simpler and simpler until we get 0 and then
we recount how many of these altogether we've
subtracted so looking at this 12 here and looking
at this 4 we see that we should subtract three of
these so three of those is 12 0 minus 3 what I'm
really doing is I'm multiplying by this Pauline
number here the poly number 3 so 3 times this
is just that multiple and I'm going to subtract
that now from the starting point and the 12s
cancel as they ought to and then we still have
8 minus 0 is 8 minus 7 minus minus 3 is minus 4
minus 2 minus 0 is minus 2 and 1 minus 0 is 1 so
that's our new number that we want to subtract
multiples of this from well now we look at the
smallest entry which is the 8 here and we asked
how many of these will fit into the eight well
the answer is I'm going to multiply that 4 by
2 but we need to multiply this poly number not
exactly by 2 but rather by 0 2 which will shift
it over by 1 so then we must apply this by this
we get zero eight zero minus two the effect is to
first of all shift it over one and then multiply
by two that guarantees that there's an eight
in the right spot so when we subtract is now a
zero there and we get minus 4 0 1 now how many of
these will fit inside here the answer is this many
in other words if we multiply this by this we get
exactly this the two zeros here effectively shift
this thing over two and then we're multiplying
by minus one so we get a minus 4 and a 1 that's
exactly what we have here what so when we take
the difference we get zero and the algorithm
terminates and now we've simply add up all the
multiples of this that we extracted 3 2 minus 1
there's the total poly number representing the
quotient here is the same computation done in
a different way by concentrating on the higher
powers of beta first so we might call this the
algebraic approach so we're not looking at the 12
but rather looking at the 1 and rather looking at
this highest power here and asking how many of
these will fit inside one so what we have to do
is we have to multiply this thing by 0 0 minus 1
there's the result of doing that multiplying it
by 0 0 moves it over twice multiplying by minus
1 gives us minus 4 0 1 and now these two numbers
exactly agree so when we take the difference we
get 0 here now we get 12 8 minus 3 minus 2 now
the highest coefficient is the minus 2 how many
of these fit into there we have to multiply by 0
2 we're looking at that minus 1 multiplied by 2
will give us a minus 2 that's what it is we get
0 8 0 minus 2 when we multiply this by this
taking the difference - 2's cancel we get 12
zero minus three which is exactly three of these
so we subtract three of them and then altogether
we've subtracted three 2 minus one we get the same
quotient as we did there so that's long division
two different approaches one starting from the
lowest coefficients the other starting from the
highest coefficients neither is better than the
other they're both completely acceptable methods
of solving this problem the beauty when we're
working with these paly numbers is that all of
the columns are essentially independent there's
no carrying or interplay between adjacent columns
here every column just acting on its own that
in fact suggests some interesting application
to ordinary arithmetic because after all this long
division is a lot like ordinary long division for
numbers so if the arithmetic for these Polly
numbers is somehow easier than the arithmetic
of ordinary numbers couldn't we perhaps apply that
idea to ordinary arithmetic so this slide is just
a brief aside from our main thrust I just now want
to suggest that there might be room for thinking
about alternate ways of doing ordinary arithmetic
with ordinary hindu-arabic numbers keeping in
mind the lessons that we're learning from Polly
number arithmetic so here is a possibly simplified
arithmetic that we can do the idea is to keep all
of the columns separate well until the very end
okay so we're not going to do any carrying until
the very end so how would that work suppose we had
to add these three numbers together I know you
all know how to do that so ordinarily we would
do nine plus five that's 14 plus 7 is 21 would
write them one here and then you put a 2 up here
to carry and then you would add that 2 to there
some of these and so on ok let's do it a little
bit differently let's just say well 9 plus 5 plus
7 is 21 well write down 21 in the ones column okay
we'll leave that 21 right there for now now in
the tens column we have 8 plus 7 plus 9 that's 15
plus 9 that's 24 we're gonna write down the 24 no
carry in the hundreds column 3 plus 4 plus 8 is 15
will write down the 15 so there's an answer it's
not in the standard hindu-arabic form because the
numbers in the ones tens and hundreds columns
are not in the acceptable range 0 to 9 this
is telling us that the answer is 21 1 s plus 24
tens plus 15 hundreds well at this stage we could
convert this pretty easily to the standard form
in the following way starting on the right here
we could say well this 21 okay that's one plus
two tens so now we can add the two tens to the 24
tens that are sitting here for a total of 26 tens
there there's 26 we still have 1500 s now we could
do the same thing here these 26 tens well we could
write six of them and the other two could join the
two hundreds to make 1700s and then at the final
stage well the seventeen hundreds can be written
as 700 plus 1000 and after you've done this a
few times you could pretty well easily could go
from here to here let's look at multiplication
which is a little bit more interesting so let's
multiply 387 by 594 I remind you what we usually
do is we we multiply four times this and then we
multiply nine times this but has to be moved
over because we're really multiplying by 90
and then five times this but we have to move
it over twice because we're really multiplying
by 500 and then we have to add all these things
up and there's various carries and so on so when
do that a little bit differently here all right
so we're gonna do everything separately 4 times
7 is 28 and we'll put 28 there 4 times 8 is 32
I'll put 32 there there's 32 tens it's really
4 times 8 tens so the total of 32 tens 4 times
3 hundreds is 12 hundreds let us put a 12 there
similarly 9 times this well it's really 90 90
times 7 is 63 tens 9 times 8 7200 s 9 times 3 27
thousands and we're not doing any cares 5 times
7 is the 35 5 times 8 is 40 5 times 3 is 15 all
what you need to know is your multiplication
table you can do this pretty quickly and now
we're going to add up the ones add up the tens add
up the hundreds the thousands the ten thousands
there's all together 28 ones there's well there's
32 plus 63 that's 95 tens I add up these that's
one hundred and nineteen hundreds and 67 thousand
and fifteen ten thousands so that's an answer but
it's not in the standard hindu-arabic form to
do that we would now start doing our carryings
so the 28 here we would write as eight ones and
the two tens move over here to join these 95 tens
for a total of 97 tens we write down seven of the
10s and then 90 join the hundreds giving us nine
more hundreds that's 128 so eight of them go there
and 120 12 go over here the 12 there would make 79
nine of them go down and the seven join the 15 to
give us 22 2 comes down and the other two moves to
the next place - so we get two hundred and twenty
nine thousand 878 which you can verify is the same
as you would get the other way why might this
be somewhat advantageous maybe it looks a little
bit more like more work but there's something a
little bit simpler about it and if you have ever
had the pleasure of multiplying two very large
numbers instead of having three digits suppose
there were ten digits well you'll know you'd have
this column of ten different multiplications one
on top of the other but when you did all these
calculations there will be lots of carries and so
the carriers that you do at each step usually you
write a little number over here now what would end
up happening you've probably experiences is that
it gets quite crowded above here because there
ends up being a lots of different carries from
different rows of the operation it gets a little
bit messy in fact you can try this out just take
two digits of 10 each multiply them out and see
that you're going to be doing a lot of caring
and it gets a little bit crowded up there here
somehow it's more systematic it's easier to see
what's going on I don't seriously advocate this
as an alternative way of teaching young people but
it's probably something that young people could
be exposed to at some stage in their careers and
maybe it would help struggling students who have
trouble doing ordinary multiplication I think
it's conceptually simpler what's going on here
then in the standard algorithm for doing addition
and multiplication with hindu-arabic numbers so we
learned something by the higher algebra in forming
something about something more basic all right so
my real aim in introducing column poly numbers as
well as row poly numbers is to put them together
I want to consider two-dimensional analogs of
poly numbers these will be quite useful and we're
going to see later on they're going to play a very
important organizing role for lots of things ok so
we're going to call these things by poly numbers
and what I want you to think about is I want you
to think about different levels of arithmetic
arithmetic with ordinary numbers like three times
four is 12 five plus seven is also 12 that's
a zero dimensional object like a point pauley
number arithmetic has a one-dimensional aspect
because we're writing these things down along a
line either a vertical line or a horizontal line
but I'll line nevertheless so we have a column of
data or a row of data it's a one-dimensional
string of data and that's the arithmetic
that we're doing there so with by pali number
arithmetic which we're not going to introduce
we move to a two-dimensional story where we have
an array covering essentially a two-dimensional
part of the plane and so our arithmetic becomes
two-dimensional okay so let's introduce these
things with some examples okay so here is a bi
poly number it's name is P what do we see here
well we see a rectangular array of numbers 1 0 5
4 3 minus 1 7 0 4 2 0 0 they happen to be integers
in this case so we're actually talking here about
by poly integers nor integral by poly numbers and
then there's this sort of frame that replaces the
little bracket that's sat on top of a poly number
that sort of tells us sort of the bounds of this
PO number how far it extends across and down it's
like a frame for the Palo number it's got little
hooks here so we can kind of imagine the rest of
the rectangle that's not actually being enclosed
here's another one its name is Q it's a slightly
different size it still has sort of four across
but now only two hi 2 minus 1 3 0 1 0 2 minus 3
now what I want you to think about here is that
the top entry here this one right here that's
like a number yeah if we just restricted
to the special case where we only had one
guy in the top corner that would be ordinary
rithmetic if we remove everything except the
first column then we'd be doing column poly
numbers if we removed everything except the
first row we would be doing row poly numbers
so now we were doing something that has both
column poly numbers in it row poly numbers
in it but sort of other stuff as well all
right so how are we going to do arithmetic
with these things well arithmetic basically
amounts to addition and multiplication so
how do we define addition and multiplication
addition is easy it's the same story whether
we're doing ordinary numbers poly numbers my
opponent numbers we just add component wise so
to add this one and this one we just look in
each position the 0 0 position is there the 0
0 position is here 1 plus 2 is 3 0 plus minus
1 is minus 1 5 plus 3 is 8 4 plus 0 is 4 3 plus
1 is 4 minus 1 plus 0 is minus 1 7 plus 2 is 9
0 plus minus 3 is minus 3 4 plus well there's
nothing down here so that nothing just doesn't
contribute we want to get a contribution here
so 4 2 0 0 just a copy of that row there so
that's the sum now more interestingly what
is the product of these two by poly numbers
I think that's a lovely exercise actually to
to think about for you so as a little bit of
a challenge if you'd like to have something to
think about for half an hour perhaps I suggest
that you ponder what first of all the definition
ought to be so what should we define the product
of these things to be and what actually does
the product of these two things end up being
so you turn off the video and have a think
about that how should we define multiplication
of these two by Polly numbers let me try to
explain multiplication sort of in steps simple
steps first so let's consider a relatively
simple example start with we multiply this
Polly number with this particularly simple one
zero one okay what does it do well 0 1 by the
way that's the one we were calling beta that
thing multiplied by this shifts it over 1 to
the right shifts it over 1 to the right it adds a
little column of zeros that's the same thing that
it does to a row Polly number it just shifts it
over to the right similarly multiplying by this
one which is alpha takes this thing and shifts
it down 1 and inserts a row of zeros ok here's
a slightly more sophisticated example so here's a
new Polly number we haven't considered it before
this is the by Polly number zero zero zero 1 and
I'm gonna tell you what it does when we multiply
by our same example here so what it does is it
takes this thing and it translates it diagonally
down one so one down and one to the right so there
it is right there it's moved to right over there
it's gone down diagonally one to the right so of
corresponding to the fact that there is a 1 there
so diagonally down from the zero zero spot here's
another example suppose we multiply by by this
one here 0 1 1 and I'm being a little bit sloppy
here I'm not going to put a 0 here always okay so
I allow my by Polly numbers to be to have little
empty spots in it if there's if it's convenient so
what this thing here is is alpha plus beta so when
we multiply it by this example it really ought to
be the sum of what we get when we multiply by
this one plus what we get when we multiply by
this one there's the two products we've already
done and suppose we add them together well we're
going to just get this one zero three one two and
then three one six five and zero four five so this
times this equals this one I hope that gives
you an idea of how the multiplication goes it's
essentially really the same as column paly number
multiplication or row paly number multiplication
but to say what officially the definition is
requires a little bit of notation so let's
introduce some general notation to describe
these by Polly numbers okay let's start with
an official definition of the simplest kind of by
Polly number which is a natural by Polly number
or just a by Polly number that's an expression
of the following form okay it's a P equals an
expression like this way if we have an array
of natural numbers each of these supposed to
be a natural number and the indexing is this
way this here is a 0 0 then a 1 0 below and a
2 0 all the way down to say a M 0 where m is some
natural number or possibly 0 over here same kind
of labeling as here except now the second entry
is 1 all the way down so a 0 1 a 1 1 a 2 1 a 3 1
all the way down to a M 1 again our next column
same thing except the second entry is 2 because
we're in the second column 2nd starting from 0
0 1 2 so a 0 to a 1 to a 2 2 all the way down
to a M 2 and we have well lots of these columns
per and say the last one is the one labeled K so
the entries here will be a0 ka1 ka2 k all the way
down to am K so M and K are rather arbitrary there
any positive numbers okay so that means natural
number or possibly zero as well if one of them is
zero it means we're talking either about a yeah
row polly number or a column home number if both
of them are zero then we're talking just about
polly number with only one entry effectively a
natural number and we'll introduce a new type by
paulina a natural by polly number and i should
remark that this notation that we're using is
probably familiar if you've taken linear algebra
it's a very similar kind of labeling that we use
in theory of matrices with a slight difference
that our labeling starts from 0 0 1 to 0 1 2 and
so on that's the same thing that we had for polly
numbers remember we had the 0th coefficient the
first coefficient second coefficient and so on
alright so once we have by Polly numbers then we
can also introduced by Polly integers by Polly
fractions we can do the same things that we do for
Polly numbers and that we do for numbers alright
I'm not going to go through all of that but let's
just make the also additional remark that once we
do have zeros allowed so once we've moved to by
Polly integers or integral by Polly numbers then
there's a kind of convention that we need to adopt
that adding zeros sort of at the ends either at
the right or at the bottom of our Polly number
doesn't change it so 1 2 3 5 is the same as 1
2 0 3 5 0 etc that's the same convention that
we had for Polly numbers we allowed ourselves
to add some zeros at the end of a pollen umber
agreeing that it doesn't really change Paulette
number alright so in terms of this labeling of
coefficients we can express a poly number bye-bye
Polly number P say as the by pollen number whose
general coefficient whose IJ coefficient is a IJ
and here's maybe a second by poly number Q whose
general coefficient is B sub IJ and these my poly
numbers can have different sizes alright so the
definition of addition is basically component wise
to add the two by opponent numbers we add each of
the coefficients separately now to multiply the 2
by poly numbers okay that's a new by poly number
let's say whose coefficient is C IJ and I have to
tell you how do we get C IJ and here's a formula
which is analogous and parallel to the formula for
the product of ordinary poly numbers okay so it's
a sum over k l m and n such that k plus M equals
I and L plus N equals J and what we're summing
is this product a KL BM n what does it mean so
it means that the IJ theö efficient is first of
all a sum it's a sum of products so we take one
product another product another product we add
them all up okay and what products are we taking
well we're taking one entry from P and another
entry from Q now these entries that we're taking
have to have some relation to I and J namely
the index here K and L and the index here M
and n have to add up as ordered pairs to I J this
is exactly analogous to what we did with ordinary
polly numbers where we only had sum of k and m say
and k and had to add up to I now we have this pair
plus this pair have to add up to this pair and
that means that K plus M equals I and L plus N
equals J let's illustrate it with an example so
a 1 2 5 3 times 4 5 1 2 1 3 so how do we get the
product you have to make a separate computation
for each coefficient here the top left-hand one
is the simplest one that's just the product of 1
times 4 this 13 is 1 times 5 plus 2 times 4 this
11 is 1 times 1 plus 2 times 5 plus 0 times 4 we
recognize that's just the ordinary multiplication
of this row paly number with this row paly number
similarly down the first column here will just be
the product of this column paly number with this
calling whole number so in the 22 is a 1 times 2
plus 5 times 4 the 10 is 1 times 0 plus 5 times 2
plus 0 times 4 how about some more general element
say this 25 here okay so this 25 it's coordinates
are 0 okay and then we go 1 that's 1 0 that's 0
1 0 2 that'll be 1 2 that's the coefficient C 1 2
corresponding 1 down 2 across what does this rule
tell us it tells us that this 25 is created by a
whole bunch of different products added together
ok which ones are they so to get this one here
we've got all together we've got to go down 1 and
across to you should think about that that's
the coefficient 1 2 we have to go down 1 and
across 2 and what we can do is we can distribute
that going down 1 and across 2 in different ways
so we have to take products of elements here and
elements here so that the coefficients add up to
one two so for example 1 times 3 because that's
0 0 that's 1 2 if we add 0 0 & 1 2 we get 1 2
so that's one allowed product another one would be
this two times that one because this is one across
and this one is one down and one across so all
together we have one down and two across it's not
two times at one or we could do this five times
this one or this three times this five and all the
other products would be 0 so this 25 is created
from 1 times 3 plus 2 times 1 plus 5 times 1 plus
3 times 5 or 25 now there's another way or several
other ways of thinking about this multiplication
another ways to say alright what we're going to do
is we're going to multiply this thing here first
by 1 which is just a copy of itself and then by
this 2 which shifts it over 1 and multiplies it
by 2 and also by this 5 which shifts it down
and multiplies it by 5 and then also by this
3 which moves it diagonally down 1 and multiplies
it by 3 so if you did those four things and added
them together you would end up getting this thing
it's a good exercise so take 1 times this 1 plus 2
times this thing moved over in that direction 1
plus 5 times this thing moved down plus 3 times
this thing moved across and you should get that
there's another way of thinking about this which
is to connect it with ordinary polynomial notation
in two variables so I hope you're not surprised to
find that a by poly number can also be written
in standard alpha-beta form let me illustrate
that with the example that we've just talked about
on that previous page this by Polly number times
this by Polly number equals this by Paula number
so how could we write this in standard alpha-beta
form well we think of the alphas corresponding to
the usual column of numbers beta corresponding to
a row polly number so this thing here is 1 plus 5
alpha plus 2 beta plus 3 alpha times beta this one
is 4 plus 2 alpha plus 5 beta plus 1 alpha beta
plus 1 beta squared plus 3 alpha beta squared
now if you just took those two polynomials which
are polynomials in two variables alpha and beta
that's the usual way of saying it although the
meaning of the word variable is highly debatable
okay if you just took that and did standard high
school algebra just expanded it out you would get
this thing and let me remind you how would you
get this term here for example the 25 alpha beta
squared you would look to see here well how can
we make an alpha with a beta squared we can make
one here by taking this one with this three alpha
beta squared that's three of them we can also take
this five alpha and multiplied by beta squared so
five times one add it on we also take this beta
and multiply it by this alpha beta that's two
times one add it on and three alpha beta times
5 beta 15 add it on and I hope you see that's
essentially the same computation that we were
making up here originally without the alphas and
betas just the positions of things keeping track
of things not the alphas and betas so the big
product that we get is just the alpha beta form
of this product by Polly number and sort of the
convention here the general convention so if we
have a by Polly number whose I J coefficient
is a IJ then we write this in standard alpha
beta form by taking a sum over all I and J the
a IJ that's the coefficient times corresponding
power of alpha and corresponding power of beta
alpha to the I beta to the J so this one here
for example that's then the one to position so
it corresponds to three alpha to the one beta
to the two that thing there corresponds to that
term there for example that 18 that let's do a
different one let's say that that nine there and
at the bottom that's the position two three that's
in the two three position so we look over here to
the term alpha squared beta cubed with coefficient
nine so we have two dimensional algebra now
we are expanding our arithmetic it's really
just arithmetic yeah it's just arithmetic
with more complicated objects and we're
gonna see eventually that this actually has some
considerable application it's an important topic
okay it's something that high school students do
say but they don't usually see it in this form
they just see it in terms of fiddling around with
ordinary polynomials but I think it's a very nice
conceptual and logical idea that polynomial like
this can be more efficiently represented often by
just the array of coefficients organized in an
organized way not just as a linear row rather
random all the elements sort of random but rather
every coefficient in the right spot so we can see
the structure of this object more clearly as a
two dimensional thing rather than as a string
as a one-dimensional thing it's essentially a
two-dimensional object this thing this may be
a new idea for you it's a very good idea so let's
have a few exercises for you so you can practice a
little bit this arithmetic with these new objects
so here's a few little exercises first one let's
define this by poly number to be R so an alpha
beta form this would be alpha plus beta so I want
you to compute that R squared is this one here
0 0 1 0 2 1 R cubed is this one a 1 3 3 1 along
the diagonal but I want you to generalize that
well but R to the fourth B over R to the sixth B
and restate what you found in terms of alpha and
beta I hope you can see that you're going to get
a connection with the binomial theorem here's
a sort of a variant of that where we consider
instead this particular by poly number 0 1 minus 1
so you can show that s squared has this form that
s cubed has this form same as in the previous one
by with alternating signs down the diagonal try to
generalize that and again restate with alpha and
beta and the third exercise was stick with the
same s defined this way but now we'll multiply it
by this diagonal type Pauli number 0 1 1 and you
need to show that that the result of that is 0 0
1 0 0 minus 1 when you multiply it by a sort of
a bigger diagonal one sort of maybe it we should
call this off diagonal 1 because the diagonals are
in this direction we get this one with a 1 here
and the minus 1 there bigger 1 we get 1 here and
minus 1 here so check those things out generalize
and Reese in terms of alpha and beta we're going
to be coming back to buy Polly numbers we're
going to look at them even in a slightly bigger
way we're going to generalize them even a little
more but before we do that we're going to have
to go back to ordinary arithmetic and introduce a
very important concept that we've left out until
now this is the idea of a decimal number it's
a subject that's fraught with difficulties both
for public school education for high school
education for university education and for
research level mathematicians okay decimal
numbers are a major source of confusion and
problems in modern mathematics we're going
to talk about them start talking about those
objects next time I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
you